chapter i well prince so genoa and lucca are now just family estates of the buonapartes. but i warn you if you dont tell me that this means war if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by that antichristi really believe he is antichristi will have nothing more to do with you and you are no longer my friend no longer my faithful slave as you call yourself but how do you do i see i have frightened yousit down and tell me all the news. it was in july and the speaker was the wellknown anna pavlovna scherer maid of honor and favorite of the empress marya fedorovna. with these words she greeted prince vasili kuragin a man of high rank and importance who was the first to arrive at her reception. anna pavlovna had had a cough for some days. she was as she said suffering from la grippe grippe being then a new word in st. petersburg used only by the elite. all her invitations without exception written in french and delivered by a scarletliveried footman that morning ran as follows if you have nothing better to do count or prince and if the prospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible i shall be very charmed to see you tonight between and annette scherer. heavens what a virulent attack replied the prince not in the least disconcerted by this reception. he had just entered wearing an embroidered court uniform knee breeches and shoes and had stars on his breast and a serene expression on his flat face. he spoke in that refined french in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought and with the gentle patronizing intonation natural to a man of importance who had grown old in society and at court. he went up to anna pavlovna kissed her hand presenting to her his bald scented and shining head and complacently seated himself on the sofa. first of all dear friend tell me how you are. set your friends mind at rest said he without altering his tone beneath the politeness and affected sympathy of which indifference and even irony could be discerned. can one be well while suffering morally can one be calm in times like these if one has any feeling said anna pavlovna. you are staying the whole evening i hope and the fete at the english ambassadors today is wednesday. i must put in an appearance there said the prince. my daughter is coming for me to take me there. i thought todays fete had been canceled. i confess all these festivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome. if they had known that you wished it the entertainment would have been put off said the prince who like a woundup clock by force of habit said things he did not even wish to be believed. dont tease well and what has been decided about novosiltsevs dispatch you know everything. what can one say about it replied the prince in a cold listless tone. what has been decided they have decided that buonaparte has burnt his boats and i believe that we are ready to burn ours. prince vasili always spoke languidly like an actor repeating a stale part. anna pavlovna scherer on the contrary despite her forty years overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. to be an enthusiast had become her social vocation and sometimes even when she did not feel like it she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the expectations of those who knew her. the subdued smile which though it did not suit her faded features always played round her lips expressed as in a spoiled child a continual consciousness of her charming defect which she neither wished nor could nor considered it necessary to correct. in the midst of a conversation on political matters anna pavlovna burst out oh dont speak to me of austria. perhaps i dont understand things but austria never has wished and does not wish for war. she is betraying us russia alone must save europe. our gracious sovereign recognizes his high vocation and will be true to it. that is the one thing i have faith in our good and wonderful sovereign has to perform the noblest role on earth and he is so virtuous and noble that god will not forsake him. he will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of revolution which has become more terrible than ever in the person of this murderer and villain we alone must avenge the blood of the just one. whom i ask you can we rely on. england with her commercial spirit will not and cannot understand the emperor alexanders loftiness of soul. she has refused to evacuate malta. she wanted to find and still seeks some secret motive in our actions. what answer did novosiltsev get none. the english have not understood and cannot understand the selfabnegation of our emperor who wants nothing for himself but only desires the good of mankind. and what have they promised nothing and what little they have promised they will not perform prussia has always declared that buonaparte is invincible and that all europe is powerless before him. and i dont believe a word that hardenburg says or haugwitz either. this famous prussian neutrality is just a trap. i have faith only in god and the lofty destiny of our adored monarch. he will save europe she suddenly paused smiling at her own impetuosity. i think said the prince with a smile that if you had been sent instead of our dear wintzingerode you would have captured the king of prussias consent by assault. you are so eloquent. will you give me a cup of tea in a moment. a propos she added becoming calm again i am expecting two very interesting men tonight le vicomte de mortemart who is connected with the montmorencys through the rohans one of the best french families. he is one of the genuine emigres the good ones. and also the abbe morio. do you know that profound thinker he has been received by the emperor. had you heard i shall be delighted to meet them said the prince. but tell me he added with studied carelessness as if it had only just occurred to him though the question he was about to ask was the chief motive of his visit is it true that the dowager empress wants baron funke to be appointed first secretary at vienna the baron by all accounts is a poor creature. prince vasili wished to obtain this post for his son but others were trying through the dowager empress marya fedorovna to secure it for the baron. anna pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor anyone else had a right to criticize what the empress desired or was pleased with. baron funke has been recommended to the dowager empress by her sister was all she said in a dry and mournful tone. as she named the empress anna pavlovnas face suddenly assumed an expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with sadness and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious patroness. she added that her majesty had deigned to show baron funke beaucoup destime and again her face clouded over with sadness. the prince was silent and looked indifferent. but with the womanly and courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her anna pavlovna wished both to rebuke him for daring to speak as he had done of a man recommended to the empress and at the same time to console him so she said now about your family. do you know that since your daughter came out everyone has been enraptured by her they say she is amazingly beautiful. the prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude. i often think she continued after a short pause drawing nearer to the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political and social topics were ended and the time had come for intimate conversationi often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life are distributed. why has fate given you two such splendid children i dont speak of anatole your youngest. i dont like him she added in a tone admitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows. two such charming children. and really you appreciate them less than anyone and so you dont deserve to have them. and she smiled her ecstatic smile. i cant help it said the prince. lavater would have said i lack the bump of paternity. dont joke i mean to have a serious talk with you. do you know i am dissatisfied with your younger son between ourselves and her face assumed its melancholy expression he was mentioned at her majestys and you were pitied. the prince answered nothing but she looked at him significantly awaiting a reply. he frowned. what would you have me do he said at last. you know i did all a father could for their education and they have both turned out fools. hippolyte is at least a quiet fool but anatole is an active one. that is the only difference between them. he said this smiling in a way more natural and animated than usual so that the wrinkles round his mouth very clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant. and why are children born to such men as you if you were not a father there would be nothing i could reproach you with said anna pavlovna looking up pensively. i am your faithful slave and to you alone i can confess that my children are the bane of my life. it is the cross i have to bear. that is how i explain it to myself. it cant be helped he said no more but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a gesture. anna pavlovna meditated. have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son anatole she asked. they say old maids have a mania for matchmaking and though i dont feel that weakness in myself as yet i know a little person who is very unhappy with her father. she is a relation of yours princess mary bolkonskaya. prince vasili did not reply though with the quickness of memory and perception befitting a man of the world he indicated by a movement of the head that he was considering this information. do you know he said at last evidently unable to check the sad current of his thoughts that anatole is costing me forty thousand rubles a year and he went on after a pause what will it be in five years if he goes on like this presently he added thats what we fathers have to put up with. is this princess of yours rich her father is very rich and stingy. he lives in the country. he is the wellknown prince bolkonski who had to retire from the army under the late emperor and was nicknamed the king of prussia. he is very clever but eccentric and a bore. the poor girl is very unhappy. she has a brother i think you know him he married lise meinen lately. he is an aidedecamp of kutuzovs and will be here tonight. listen dear annette said the prince suddenly taking anna pavlovnas hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. arrange that affair for me and i shall always be your most devoted slaveslafe with an f as a village elder of mine writes in his reports. she is rich and of good family and thats all i want. and with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him he raised the maid of honors hand to his lips kissed it and swung it to and fro as he lay back in his armchair looking in another direction. attendez said anna pavlovna reflecting ill speak to lise young bolkonskis wife this very evening and perhaps the thing can be arranged. it shall be on your familys behalf that ill start my apprenticeship as old maid. chapter ii anna pavlovnas drawing room was gradually filling. the highest petersburg society was assembled there people differing widely in age and character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged. prince vasilis daughter the beautiful helene came to take her father to the ambassadors entertainment she wore a ball dress and her badge as maid of honor. the youthful little princess bolkonskaya known as la femme la plus seduisante de petersbourg was also there. she had been married during the previous winter and being pregnant did not go to any large gatherings but only to small receptions. prince vasilis son hippolyte had come with mortemart whom he introduced. the abbe morio and many others had also come. the most fascinating woman in petersburg. to each new arrival anna pavlovna said you have not yet seen my aunt or you do not know my aunt and very gravely conducted him or her to a little old lady wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap who had come sailing in from another room as soon as the guests began to arrive and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt anna pavlovna mentioned each ones name and then left them. each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom not one of them knew not one of them wanted to know and not one of them cared about anna pavlovna observed these greetings with mournful and solemn interest and silent approval. the aunt spoke to each of them in the same words about their health and her own and the health of her majesty who thank god was better today. and each visitor though politeness prevented his showing impatience left the old woman with a sense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not return to her the whole evening. the young princess bolkonskaya had brought some work in a gold embroidered velvet bag. her pretty little upper lip on which a delicate dark down was just perceptible was too short for her teeth but it lifted all the more sweetly and was especially charming when she occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. as is always the case with a thoroughly attractive woman her defectthe shortness of her upper lip and her halfopen mouthseemed to be her own special and peculiar form of beauty. everyone brightened at the sight of this pretty young woman so soon to become a mother so full of life and health and carrying her burden so lightly. old men and dull dispirited young ones who looked at her after being in her company and talking to her a little while felt as if they too were becoming like her full of life and health. all who talked to her and at each word saw her bright smile and the constant gleam of her white teeth thought that they were in a specially amiable mood that day. the little princess went round the table with quick short swaying steps her workbag on her arm and gaily spreading out her dress sat down on a sofa near the silver samovar as if all she was doing was a pleasure to herself and to all around her. i have brought my work said she in french displaying her bag and addressing all present. mind annette i hope you have not played a wicked trick on me she added turning to her hostess. you wrote that it was to be quite a small reception and just see how badly i am dressed. and she spread out her arms to show her shortwaisted lacetrimmed dainty gray dress girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast. soyez tranquille lise you will always be prettier than anyone else replied anna pavlovna. you know said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in french turning to a general my husband is deserting me he is going to get himself killed. tell me what this wretched war is for she added addressing prince vasili and without waiting for an answer she turned to speak to his daughter the beautiful helene. what a delightful woman this little princess is said prince vasili to anna pavlovna. one of the next arrivals was a stout heavily built young man with closecropped hair spectacles the lightcolored breeches fashionable at that time a very high ruffle and a brown dress coat. this stout young man was an illegitimate son of count bezukhov a wellknown grandee of catherines time who now lay dying in moscow. the young man had not yet entered either the military or civil service as he had only just returned from abroad where he had been educated and this was his first appearance in society. anna pavlovna greeted him with the nod she accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. but in spite of this lowestgrade greeting a look of anxiety and fear as at the sight of something too large and unsuited to the place came over her face when she saw pierre enter. though he was certainly rather bigger than the other men in the room her anxiety could only have reference to the clever though shy but observant and natural expression which distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room. it is very good of you monsieur pierre to come and visit a poor invalid said anna pavlovna exchanging an alarmed glance with her aunt as she conducted him to her. pierre murmured something unintelligible and continued to look round as if in search of something. on his way to the aunt he bowed to the little princess with a pleased smile as to an intimate acquaintance. anna pavlovnas alarm was justified for pierre turned away from the aunt without waiting to hear her speech about her majestys health. anna pavlovna in dismay detained him with the words do you know the abbe morio he is a most interesting man. yes i have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace and it is very interesting but hardly feasible. you think so rejoined anna pavlovna in order to say something and get away to attend to her duties as hostess. but pierre now committed a reverse act of impoliteness. first he had left a lady before she had finished speaking to him and now he continued to speak to another who wished to get away. with his head bent and his big feet spread apart he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbes plan chimerical. we will talk of it later said anna pavlovna with a smile. and having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave she resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch ready to help at any point where the conversation might happen to flag. as the foreman of a spinning mill when he has set the hands to work goes round and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one that creaks or makes more noise than it should and hastens to check the machine or set it in proper motion so anna pavlovna moved about her drawing room approaching now a silent now a toonoisy group and by a word or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady proper and regular motion. but amid these cares her anxiety about pierre was evident. she kept an anxious watch on him when he approached the group round mortemart to listen to what was being said there and again when he passed to another group whose center was the abbe. pierre had been educated abroad and this reception at anna pavlovnas was the first he had attended in russia. he knew that all the intellectual lights of petersburg were gathered there and like a child in a toyshop did not know which way to look afraid of missing any clever conversation that was to be heard. seeing the selfconfident and refined expression on the faces of those present he was always expecting to hear something very profound. at last he came up to morio. here the conversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an opportunity to express his own views as young people are fond of doing. chapter iii anna pavlovnas reception was in full swing. the spindles hummed steadily and ceaselessly on all sides. with the exception of the aunt beside whom sat only one elderly lady who with her thin careworn face was rather out of place in this brilliant society the whole company had settled into three groups. one chiefly masculine had formed round the abbe. another of young people was grouped round the beautiful princess helene prince vasilis daughter and the little princess bolkonskaya very pretty and rosy though rather too plump for her age. the third group was gathered round mortemart and anna pavlovna. the vicomte was a nicelooking young man with soft features and polished manners who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out of politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle in which he found himself. anna pavlovna was obviously serving him up as a treat to her guests. as a clever maitre dhotel serves up as a specially choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen it in the kitchen would have cared to eat so anna pavlovna served up to her guests first the vicomte and then the abbe as peculiarly choice morsels. the group about mortemart immediately began discussing the murder of the duc denghien. the vicomte said that the duc denghien had perished by his own magnanimity and that there were particular reasons for buonapartes hatred of him. ah yes do tell us all about it vicomte said anna pavlovna with a pleasant feeling that there was something a la louis xv in the sound of that sentence contez nous cela vicomte. the vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness to comply. anna pavlovna arranged a group round him inviting everyone to listen to his tale. the vicomte knew the duc personally whispered anna pavlovna to one of the guests. the vicomte is a wonderful raconteur said she to another. how evidently he belongs to the best society said she to a third and the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest and most advantageous style like a wellgarnished joint of roast beef on a hot dish. the vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile. come over here helene dear said anna pavlovna to the beautiful young princess who was sitting some way off the center of another group. the princess smiled. she rose with the same unchanging smile with which she had first entered the roomthe smile of a perfectly beautiful woman. with a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss and ivy with a gleam of white shoulders glossy hair and sparkling diamonds she passed between the men who made way for her not looking at any of them but smiling on all as if graciously allowing each the privilege of admiring her beautiful figure and shapely shoulders back and bosomwhich in the fashion of those days were very much exposed and she seemed to bring the glamour of a ballroom with her as she moved toward anna pavlovna. helene was so lovely that not only did she not show any trace of coquetry but on the contrary she even appeared shy of her unquestionable and all too victorious beauty. she seemed to wish but to be unable to diminish its effect. how lovely said everyone who saw her and the vicomte lifted his shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something extraordinary when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also with her unchanging smile. madame i doubt my ability before such an audience said he smilingly inclining his head. the princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considered a reply unnecessary. she smilingly waited. all the time the story was being told she sat upright glancing now at her beautiful round arm altered in shape by its pressure on the table now at her still more beautiful bosom on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. from time to time she smoothed the folds of her dress and whenever the story produced an effect she glanced at anna pavlovna at once adopted just the expression she saw on the maid of honors face and again relapsed into her radiant smile. the little princess had also left the tea table and followed helene. wait a moment ill get my work. now then what are you thinking of she went on turning to prince hippolyte. fetch me my workbag. there was a general movement as the princess smiling and talking merrily to everyone at once sat down and gaily arranged herself in her seat. now i am all right she said and asking the vicomte to begin she took up her work. prince hippolyte having brought the workbag joined the circle and moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her. le charmant hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance to his beautiful sister but yet more by the fact that in spite of this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. his features were like his sisters but while in her case everything was lit up by a joyous self satisfied youthful and constant smile of animation and by the wonderful classic beauty of her figure his face on the contrary was dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen self confidence while his body was thin and weak. his eyes nose and mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant wearied grimace and his arms and legs always fell into unnatural positions. its not going to be a ghost story said he sitting down beside the princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette as if without this instrument he could not begin to speak. why no my dear fellow said the astonished narrator shrugging his shoulders. because i hate ghost stories said prince hippolyte in a tone which showed that he only understood the meaning of his words after he had uttered them. he spoke with such selfconfidence that his hearers could not be sure whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. he was dressed in a darkgreen dress coat knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe effrayee as he called it shoes and silk stockings. the vicomte told his tale very neatly. it was an anecdote then current to the effect that the duc denghien had gone secretly to paris to visit mademoiselle george that at her house he came upon bonaparte who also enjoyed the famous actress favors and that in his presence napoleon happened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was subject and was thus at the ducs mercy. the latter spared him and this magnanimity bonaparte subsequently repaid by death. the story was very pretty and interesting especially at the point where the rivals suddenly recognized one another and the ladies looked agitated. charming said anna pavlovna with an inquiring glance at the little princess. charming whispered the little princess sticking the needle into her work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story prevented her from going on with it. the vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully prepared to continue but just then anna pavlovna who had kept a watchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her noticed that he was talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbe so she hurried to the rescue. pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbe about the balance of power and the latter evidently interested by the young mans simpleminded eagerness was explaining his pet theory. both were talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally which was why anna pavlovna disapproved. the means are. the balance of power in europe and the rights of the people the abbe was saying. it is only necessary for one powerful nation like russiabarbaric as she is said to beto place herself disinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for its object the maintenance of the balance of power of europe and it would save the world but how are you to get that balance pierre was beginning. at that moment anna pavlovna came up and looking severely at pierre asked the italian how he stood russian climate. the italians face instantly changed and assumed an offensively affected sugary expression evidently habitual to him when conversing with women. i am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the society more especially of the feminine society in which i have had the honor of being received that i have not yet had time to think of the climate said he. not letting the abbe and pierre escape anna pavlovna the more conveniently to keep them under observation brought them into the larger circle. chapter iv just then another visitor entered the drawing room prince andrew bolkonski the little princess husband. he was a very handsome young man of medium height with firm clearcut features. everything about him from his weary bored expression to his quiet measured step offered a most striking contrast to his quiet little wife. it was evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing room but had found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to them. and among all these faces that he found so tedious none seemed to bore him so much as that of his pretty wife. he turned away from her with a grimace that distorted his handsome face kissed anna pavlovnas hand and screwing up his eyes scanned the whole company. you are off to the war prince said anna pavlovna. general kutuzov said bolkonski speaking french and stressing the last syllable of the generals name like a frenchman has been pleased to take me as an aidedecamp. and lise your wife she will go to the country. are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife andre said his wife addressing her husband in the same coquettish manner in which she spoke to other men the vicomte has been telling us such a tale about mademoiselle george and buonaparte prince andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. pierre who from the moment prince andrew entered the room had watched him with glad affectionate eyes now came up and took his arm. before he looked round prince andrew frowned again expressing his annoyance with whoever was touching his arm but when he saw pierres beaming face he gave him an unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile. there now. so you too are in the great world said he to pierre. i knew you would be here replied pierre. i will come to supper with you. may i he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the vicomte who was continuing his story. no impossible said prince andrew laughing and pressing pierres hand to show that there was no need to ask the question. he wished to say something more but at that moment prince vasili and his daughter got up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass. you must excuse me dear vicomte said prince vasili to the frenchman holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent his rising. this unfortunate fete at the ambassadors deprives me of a pleasure and obliges me to interrupt you. i am very sorry to leave your enchanting party said he turning to anna pavlovna. his daughter princess helene passed between the chairs lightly holding up the folds of her dress and the smile shone still more radiantly on her beautiful face. pierre gazed at her with rapturous almost frightened eyes as she passed him. very lovely said prince andrew. very said pierre. in passing prince vasili seized pierres hand and said to anna pavlovna educate this bear for me he has been staying with me a whole month and this is the first time i have seen him in society. nothing is so necessary for a young man as the society of clever women. anna pavlovna smiled and promised to take pierre in hand. she knew his father to be a connection of prince vasilis. the elderly lady who had been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook prince vasili in the anteroom. all the affectation of interest she had assumed had left her kindly and tearworn face and it now expressed only anxiety and fear. how about my son boris prince said she hurrying after him into the anteroom. i cant remain any longer in petersburg. tell me what news i may take back to my poor boy. although prince vasili listened reluctantly and not very politely to the elderly lady even betraying some impatience she gave him an ingratiating and appealing smile and took his hand that he might not go away. what would it cost you to say a word to the emperor and then he would be transferred to the guards at once said she. believe me princess i am ready to do all i can answered prince vasili but it is difficult for me to ask the emperor. i should advise you to appeal to rumyantsev through prince golitsyn. that would be the best way. the elderly lady was a princess drubetskaya belonging to one of the best families in russia but she was poor and having long been out of society had lost her former influential connections. she had now come to petersburg to procure an appointment in the guards for her only son. it was in fact solely to meet prince vasili that she had obtained an invitation to anna pavlovnas reception and had sat listening to the vicomtes story. prince vasilis words frightened her an embittered look clouded her once handsome face but only for a moment then she smiled again and clutched prince vasilis arm more tightly. listen to me prince said she. i have never yet asked you for anything and i never will again nor have i ever reminded you of my fathers friendship for you but now i entreat you for gods sake to do this for my sonand i shall always regard you as a benefactor she added hurriedly. no dont be angry but promise i have asked golitsyn and he has refused. be the kindhearted man you always were she said trying to smile though tears were in her eyes. papa we shall be late said princess helene turning her beautiful head and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she stood waiting by the door. influence in society however is a capital which has to be economized if it is to last. prince vasili knew this and having once realized that if he asked on behalf of all who begged of him he would soon be unable to ask for himself he became chary of using his influence. but in princess drubetskayas case he felt after her second appeal something like qualms of conscience. she had reminded him of what was quite true he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in his career. moreover he could see by her manners that she was one of those women mostly motherswho having once made up their minds will not rest until they have gained their end and are prepared if necessary to go on insisting day after day and hour after hour and even to make scenes. this last consideration moved him. my dear anna mikhaylovna said he with his usual familiarity and weariness of tone it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask but to prove my devotion to you and how i respect your fathers memory i will do the impossibleyour son shall be transferred to the guards. here is my hand on it. are you satisfied my dear benefactor this is what i expected from youi knew your kindness he turned to go. waitjust a word when he has been transferred to the guards. she faltered. you are on good terms with michael ilarionovich kutuzov. recommend boris to him as adjutant then i shall be at rest and then. prince vasili smiled. no i wont promise that. you dont know how kutuzov is pestered since his appointment as commander in chief. he told me himself that all the moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as adjutants. no but do promise i wont let you go my dear benefactor. papa said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before we shall be late. well au revoir goodbye you hear her then tomorrow you will speak to the emperor certainly but about kutuzov i dont promise. do promise do promise vasili cried anna mikhaylovna as he went with the smile of a coquettish girl which at one time probably came naturally to her but was now very illsuited to her careworn face. apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed all the old feminine arts. but as soon as the prince had gone her face resumed its former cold artificial expression. she returned to the group where the vicomte was still talking and again pretended to listen while waiting till it would be time to leave. her task was accomplished. chapter v and what do you think of this latest comedy the coronation at milan asked anna pavlovna and of the comedy of the people of genoa and lucca laying their petitions before monsieur buonaparte and monsieur buonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of the nations adorable it is enough to make ones head whirl it is as if the whole world had gone crazy. prince andrew looked anna pavlovna straight in the face with a sarcastic smile. dieu me la donne gare a qui la touche they say he was very fine when he said that he remarked repeating the words in italian dio mi lha dato. guai a chi la tocchi god has given it to me let him who touches it beware i hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run over anna pavlovna continued. the sovereigns will not be able to endure this man who is a menace to everything. the sovereigns i do not speak of russia said the vicomte polite but hopeless the sovereigns madame. what have they done for louis xvii for the queen or for madame elizabeth nothing and he became more animated. and believe me they are reaping the reward of their betrayal of the bourbon cause. the sovereigns why they are sending ambassadors to compliment the usurper. and sighing disdainfully he again changed his position. prince hippolyte who had been gazing at the vicomte for some time through his lorgnette suddenly turned completely round toward the little princess and having asked for a needle began tracing the conde coat of arms on the table. he explained this to her with as much gravity as if she had asked him to do it. baton de gueules engrele de gueules dazurmaison conde said he. the princess listened smiling. if buonaparte remains on the throne of france a year longer the vicomte continued with the air of a man who in a matter with which he is better acquainted than anyone else does not listen to others but follows the current of his own thoughts things will have gone too far. by intrigues violence exile and executions french societyi mean good french societywill have been forever destroyed and then. he shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. pierre wished to make a remark for the conversation interested him but anna pavlovna who had him under observation interrupted the emperor alexander said she with the melancholy which always accompanied any reference of hers to the imperial family has declared that he will leave it to the french people themselves to choose their own form of government and i believe that once free from the usurper the whole nation will certainly throw itself into the arms of its rightful king she concluded trying to be amiable to the royalist emigrant. that is doubtful said prince andrew. monsieur le vicomte quite rightly supposes that matters have already gone too far. i think it will be difficult to return to the old regime. from what i have heard said pierre blushing and breaking into the conversation almost all the aristocracy has already gone over to bonapartes side. it is the buonapartists who say that replied the vicomte without looking at pierre. at the present time it is difficult to know the real state of french public opinion. bonaparte has said so remarked prince andrew with a sarcastic smile. it was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming his remarks at him though without looking at him. i showed them the path to glory but they did not follow it prince andrew continued after a short silence again quoting napoleons words. i opened my antechambers and they crowded in. i do not know how far he was justified in saying so. not in the least replied the vicomte. after the murder of the duc even the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. if to some people he went on turning to anna pavlovna he ever was a hero after the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and one hero less on earth. before anna pavlovna and the others had time to smile their appreciation of the vicomtes epigram pierre again broke into the conversation and though anna pavlovna felt sure he would say something inappropriate she was unable to stop him. the execution of the duc denghien declared monsieur pierre was a political necessity and it seems to me that napoleon showed greatness of soul by not fearing to take on himself the whole responsibility of that deed. dieu mon dieu muttered anna pavlovna in a terrified whisper. what monsieur pierre. do you consider that assassination shows greatness of soul said the little princess smiling and drawing her work nearer to her. oh oh exclaimed several voices. capital said prince hippolyte in english and began slapping his knee with the palm of his hand. the vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. pierre looked solemnly at his audience over his spectacles and continued. i say so he continued desperately because the bourbons fled from the revolution leaving the people to anarchy and napoleon alone understood the revolution and quelled it and so for the general good he could not stop short for the sake of one mans life. wont you come over to the other table suggested anna pavlovna. but pierre continued his speech without heeding her. no cried he becoming more and more eager napoleon is great because he rose superior to the revolution suppressed its abuses preserved all that was good in itequality of citizenship and freedom of speech and of the pressand only for that reason did he obtain power. yes if having obtained power without availing himself of it to commit murder he had restored it to the rightful king i should have called him a great man remarked the vicomte. he could not do that. the people only gave him power that he might rid them of the bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man. the revolution was a grand thing continued monsieur pierre betraying by this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and his wish to express all that was in his mind. what revolution and regicide a grand thing. well after that. but wont you come to this other table repeated anna pavlovna. rousseaus contrat social said the vicomte with a tolerant smile. i am not speaking of regicide i am speaking about ideas. yes ideas of robbery murder and regicide again interjected an ironical voice. those were extremes no doubt but they are not what is most important. what is important are the rights of man emancipation from prejudices and equality of citizenship and all these ideas napoleon has retained in full force. liberty and equality said the vicomte contemptuously as if at last deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words were highsounding words which have long been discredited. who does not love liberty and equality even our saviour preached liberty and equality. have people since the revolution become happier on the contrary. we wanted liberty but buonaparte has destroyed it. prince andrew kept looking with an amused smile from pierre to the vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. in the first moment of pierres outburst anna pavlovna despite her social experience was horrorstruck. but when she saw that pierres sacrilegious words had not exasperated the vicomte and had convinced herself that it was impossible to stop him she rallied her forces and joined the vicomte in a vigorous attack on the orator. but my dear monsieur pierre said she how do you explain the fact of a great man executing a ducor even an ordinary man whois innocent and untried i should like said the vicomte to ask how monsieur explains the th brumaire was not that an imposture it was a swindle and not at all like the conduct of a great man and the prisoners he killed in africa that was horrible said the little princess shrugging her shoulders. hes a low fellow say what you will remarked prince hippolyte. pierre not knowing whom to answer looked at them all and smiled. his smile was unlike the halfsmile of other people. when he smiled his grave even rather gloomy look was instantaneously replaced by another a childlike kindly even rather silly look which seemed to ask forgiveness. the vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that this young jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested. all were silent. how do you expect him to answer you all at once said prince andrew. besides in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish between his acts as a private person as a general and as an emperor. so it seems to me. yes yes of course pierre chimed in pleased at the arrival of this reinforcement. one must admit continued prince andrew that napoleon as a man was great on the bridge of arcola and in the hospital at jaffa where he gave his hand to the plaguestricken but. but there are other acts which it is difficult to justify. prince andrew who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of pierres remarks rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to go. suddenly prince hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend and asking them all to be seated began i was told a charming moscow story today and must treat you to it. excuse me vicomtei must tell it in russian or the point will be lost. and prince hippolyte began to tell his story in such russian as a frenchman would speak after spending about a year in russia. everyone waited so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their attention to his story. there is in moscow a lady une dame and she is very stingy. she must have two footmen behind her carriage and very big ones. that was her taste. and she had a ladys maid also big. she said. here prince hippolyte paused evidently collecting his ideas with difficulty. she said. oh yes she said girl to the maid put on a livery get up behind the carriage and come with me while i make some calls. here prince hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before his audience which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. several persons among them the elderly lady and anna pavlovna did however smile. she went. suddenly there was a great wind. the girl lost her hat and her long hair came down. here he could contain himself no longer and went on between gasps of laughter and the whole world knew. and so the anecdote ended. though it was unintelligible why he had told it or why it had to be told in russian still anna pavlovna and the others appreciated prince hippolytes social tact in so agreeably ending pierres unpleasant and unamiable outburst. after the anecdote the conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last and next balls about theatricals and who would meet whom and when and where. chapter vi having thanked anna pavlovna for her charming soiree the guests began to take their leave. pierre was ungainly. stout about the average height broad with huge red hands he did not know as the saying is how to enter a drawing room and still less how to leave one that is how to say something particularly agreeable before going away. besides this he was absent minded. when he rose to go he took up instead of his own the generals threecornered hat and held it pulling at the plume till the general asked him to restore it. all his absentmindedness and inability to enter a room and converse in it was however redeemed by his kindly simple and modest expression. anna pavlovna turned toward him and with a christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his indiscretion nodded and said i hope to see you again but i also hope you will change your opinions my dear monsieur pierre. when she said this he did not reply and only bowed but again everybody saw his smile which said nothing unless perhaps opinions are opinions but you see what a capital goodnatured fellow i am. and everyone including anna pavlovna felt this. prince andrew had gone out into the hall and turning his shoulders to the footman who was helping him on with his cloak listened indifferently to his wifes chatter with prince hippolyte who had also come into the hall. prince hippolyte stood close to the pretty pregnant princess and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass. go in annette or you will catch cold said the little princess taking leave of anna pavlovna. it is settled she added in a low voice. anna pavlovna had already managed to speak to lise about the match she contemplated between anatole and the little princess sisterinlaw. i rely on you my dear said anna pavlovna also in a low tone. write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. au revoir and she left the hall. prince hippolyte approached the little princess and bending his face close to her began to whisper something. two footmen the princess and his own stood holding a shawl and a cloak waiting for the conversation to finish. they listened to the french sentences which to them were meaningless with an air of understanding but not wishing to appear to do so. the princess as usual spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh. i am very glad i did not go to the ambassadors said prince hippolyte so dull. it has been a delightful evening has it not delightful they say the ball will be very good replied the princess drawing up her downy little lip. all the pretty women in society will be there. not all for you will not be there not all said prince hippolyte smiling joyfully and snatching the shawl from the footman whom he even pushed aside he began wrapping it round the princess. either from awkwardness or intentionally no one could have said which after the shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time as though embracing her. still smiling she gracefully moved away turning and glancing at her husband. prince andrews eyes were closed so weary and sleepy did he seem. are you ready he asked his wife looking past her. prince hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak which in the latest fashion reached to his very heels and stumbling in it ran out into the porch following the princess whom a footman was helping into the carriage. princesse au revoir cried he stumbling with his tongue as well as with his feet. the princess picking up her dress was taking her seat in the dark carriage her husband was adjusting his saber prince hippolyte under pretense of helping was in everyones way. allow me sir said prince andrew in russian in a cold disagreeable tone to prince hippolyte who was blocking his path. i am expecting you pierre said the same voice but gently and affectionately. the postilion started the carriage wheels rattled. prince hippolyte laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte whom he had promised to take home. well mon cher said the vicomte having seated himself beside hippolyte in the carriage your little princess is very nice very nice indeed quite french and he kissed the tips of his fingers. hippolyte burst out laughing. do you know you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs continued the vicomte. i pity the poor husband that little officer who gives himself the airs of a monarch. hippolyte spluttered again and amid his laughter said and you were saying that the russian ladies are not equal to the french one has to know how to deal with them. pierre reaching the house first went into prince andrews study like one quite at home and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa took from the shelf the first book that came to his hand it was caesars commentaries and resting on his elbow began reading it in the middle. what have you done to mlle scherer she will be quite ill now said prince andrew as he entered the study rubbing his small white hands. pierre turned his whole body making the sofa creak. he lifted his eager face to prince andrew smiled and waved his hand. that abbe is very interesting but he does not see the thing in the right light. in my opinion perpetual peace is possible buti do not know how to express it. not by a balance of political power. it was evident that prince andrew was not interested in such abstract conversation. one cant everywhere say all one thinks mon cher. well have you at last decided on anything are you going to be a guardsman or a diplomatist asked prince andrew after a momentary silence. pierre sat up on the sofa with his legs tucked under him. really i dont yet know. i dont like either the one or the other. but you must decide on something your father expects it. pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor and had remained away till he was twenty. when he returned to moscow his father dismissed the abbe and said to the young man now go to petersburg look round and choose your profession. i will agree to anything. here is a letter to prince vasili and here is money. write to me all about it and i will help you in everything. pierre had already been choosing a career for three months and had not decided on anything. it was about this choice that prince andrew was speaking. pierre rubbed his forehead. but he must be a freemason said he referring to the abbe whom he had met that evening. that is all nonsense. prince andrew again interrupted him let us talk business. have you been to the horse guards no i have not but this is what i have been thinking and wanted to tell you. there is a war now against napoleon. if it were a war for freedom i could understand it and should be the first to enter the army but to help england and austria against the greatest man in the world is not right. prince andrew only shrugged his shoulders at pierres childish words. he put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to such nonsense but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other answer than the one prince andrew gave to this naive question. if no one fought except on his own conviction there would be no wars he said. and that would be splendid said pierre. prince andrew smiled ironically. very likely it would be splendid but it will never come about. well why are you going to the war asked pierre. what for i dont know. i must. besides that i am going. he paused. i am going because the life i am leading here does not suit me chapter vii the rustle of a womans dress was heard in the next room. prince andrew shook himself as if waking up and his face assumed the look it had had in anna pavlovnas drawing room. pierre removed his feet from the sofa. the princess came in. she had changed her gown for a house dress as fresh and elegant as the other. prince andrew rose and politely placed a chair for her. how is it she began as usual in french settling down briskly and fussily in the easy chair how is it annette never got married how stupid you men all are not to have married her excuse me for saying so but you have no sense about women. what an argumentative fellow you are monsieur pierre and i am still arguing with your husband. i cant understand why he wants to go to the war replied pierre addressing the princess with none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in their intercourse with young women. the princess started. evidently pierres words touched her to the quick. ah that is just what i tell him said she. i dont understand it i dont in the least understand why men cant live without wars. how is it that we women dont want anything of the kind dont need it now you shall judge between us. i always tell him here he is uncles aidede camp a most brilliant position. he is so well known so much appreciated by everyone. the other day at the apraksins i heard a lady asking is that the famous prince andrew i did indeed. she laughed. he is so well received everywhere. he might easily become aidedecamp to the emperor. you know the emperor spoke to him most graciously. annette and i were speaking of how to arrange it. what do you think pierre looked at his friend and noticing that he did not like the conversation gave no reply. when are you starting he asked. oh dont speak of his going dont i wont hear it spoken of said the princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which she had spoken to hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly illsuited to the family circle of which pierre was almost a member. today when i remembered that all these delightful associations must be broken off. and then you know andre. she looked significantly at her husband im afraid im afraid she whispered and a shudder ran down her back. her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides pierre and himself was in the room and addressed her in a tone of frigid politeness. what is it you are afraid of lise i dont understand said he. there what egotists men all are all all egotists just for a whim of his own goodness only knows why he leaves me and locks me up alone in the country. with my father and sister remember said prince andrew gently. alone all the same without my friends. and he expects me not to be afraid. her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up giving her not a joyful but an animal squirrellike expression. she paused as if she felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before pierre though the gist of the matter lay in that. i still cant understand what you are afraid of said prince andrew slowly not taking his eyes off his wife. the princess blushed and raised her arms with a gesture of despair. no andrew i must say you have changed. oh how you have. your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier said prince andrew. you had better go. the princess said nothing but suddenly her short downy lip quivered. prince andrew rose shrugged his shoulders and walked about the room. pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise now at him and now at her moved as if about to rise too but changed his mind. why should i mind monsieur pierre being here exclaimed the little princess suddenly her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful grimace. i have long wanted to ask you andrew why you have changed so to me what have i done to you you are going to the war and have no pity for me. why is it lise was all prince andrew said. but that one word expressed an entreaty a threat and above all conviction that she would herself regret her words. but she went on hurriedly you treat me like an invalid or a child. i see it all did you behave like that six months ago lise i beg you to desist said prince andrew still more emphatically. pierre who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to all this rose and approached the princess. he seemed unable to bear the sight of tears and was ready to cry himself. calm yourself princess it seems so to you because. i assure you i myself have experienced. and so. because. no excuse me an outsider is out of place here. no dont distress yourself. good bye prince andrew caught him by the hand. no wait pierre the princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of the pleasure of spending the evening with you. no he thinks only of himself muttered the princess without restraining her angry tears. lise said prince andrew dryly raising his voice to the pitch which indicates that patience is exhausted. suddenly the angry squirrellike expression of the princess pretty face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. her beautiful eyes glanced askance at her husbands face and her own assumed the timid deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its drooping tail. mon dieu mon dieu she muttered and lifting her dress with one hand she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead. good night lise said he rising and courteously kissing her hand as he would have done to a stranger. chapter viii the friends were silent. neither cared to begin talking. pierre continually glanced at prince andrew prince andrew rubbed his forehead with his small hand. let us go and have supper he said with a sigh going to the door. they entered the elegant newly decorated and luxurious dining room. everything from the table napkins to the silver china and glass bore that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married. halfway through supper prince andrew leaned his elbows on the table and with a look of nervous agitation such as pierre had never before seen on his face began to talkas one who has long had something on his mind and suddenly determines to speak out. never never marry my dear fellow thats my advice never marry till you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of and until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen her plainly as she is or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable mistake. marry when you are old and good for nothingor all that is good and noble in you will be lost. it will all be wasted on trifles. yes yes yes dont look at me with such surprise. if you marry expecting anything from yourself in the future you will feel at every step that for you all is ended all is closed except the drawing room where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and an idiot. but whats the good. and he waved his arm. pierre took off his spectacles which made his face seem different and the goodnatured expression still more apparent and gazed at his friend in amazement. my wife continued prince andrew is an excellent woman one of those rare women with whom a mans honor is safe but o god what would i not give now to be unmarried you are the first and only one to whom i mention this because i like you. as he said this prince andrew was less than ever like that bolkonski who had lolled in anna pavlovnas easy chairs and with halfclosed eyes had uttered french phrases between his teeth. every muscle of his thin face was now quivering with nervous excitement his eyes in which the fire of life had seemed extinguished now flashed with brilliant light. it was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times the more impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid irritation. you dont understand why i say this he continued but it is the whole story of life. you talk of bonaparte and his career said he though pierre had not mentioned bonaparte but bonaparte when he worked went step by step toward his goal. he was free he had nothing but his aim to consider and he reached it. but tie yourself up with a woman and like a chained convict you lose all freedom and all you have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you with regret. drawing rooms gossip balls vanity and trivialitythese are the enchanted circle i cannot escape from. i am now going to the war the greatest war there ever was and i know nothing and am fit for nothing. i am very amiable and have a caustic wit continued prince andrew and at anna pavlovnas they listen to me. and that stupid set without whom my wife cannot exist and those women. if you only knew what those society women are and women in general my father is right. selfish vain stupid trivial in everythingthats what women are when you see them in their true colors when you meet them in society it seems as if there were something in them but theres nothing nothing nothing no dont marry my dear fellow dont marry concluded prince andrew. it seems funny to me said pierre that you you should consider yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. you have everything before you everything. and you. he did not finish his sentence but his tone showed how highly he thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future. how can he talk like that thought pierre. he considered his friend a model of perfection because prince andrew possessed in the highest degree just the very qualities pierre lacked and which might be best described as strength of will. pierre was always astonished at prince andrews calm manner of treating everybody his extraordinary memory his extensive reading he had read everything knew everything and had an opinion about everything but above all at his capacity for work and study. and if pierre was often struck by andrews lack of capacity for philosophical meditation to which he himself was particularly addicted he regarded even this not as a defect but as a sign of strength. even in the best most friendly and simplest relations of life praise and commendation are essential just as grease is necessary to wheels that they may run smoothly. my part is played out said prince andrew. whats the use of talking about me let us talk about you he added after a silence smiling at his reassuring thoughts. that smile was immediately reflected on pierres face. but what is there to say about me said pierre his face relaxing into a careless merry smile. what am i an illegitimate son he suddenly blushed crimson and it was plain that he had made a great effort to say this. without a name and without means. and it really. but he did not say what it really was. for the present i am free and am all right. only i havent the least idea what i am to do i wanted to consult you seriously. prince andrew looked kindly at him yet his glancefriendly and affectionate as it wasexpressed a sense of his own superiority. i am fond of you especially as you are the one live man among our whole set. yes youre all right choose what you will its all the same. youll be all right anywhere. but look here give up visiting those kuragins and leading that sort of life. it suits you so badlyall this debauchery dissipation and the rest of it what would you have my dear fellow answered pierre shrugging his shoulders. women my dear fellow women i dont understand it replied prince andrew. women who are comme il faut thats a different matter but the kuragins set of women women and wine i dont understand pierre was staying at prince vasili kuragins and sharing the dissipated life of his son anatole the son whom they were planning to reform by marrying him to prince andrews sister. do you know said pierre as if suddenly struck by a happy thought seriously i have long been thinking of it. leading such a life i cant decide or think properly about anything. ones head aches and one spends all ones money. he asked me for tonight but i wont go. you give me your word of honor not to go on my honor chapter ix it was past one oclock when pierre left his friend. it was a cloudless northern summer night. pierre took an open cab intending to drive straight home. but the nearer he drew to the house the more he felt the impossibility of going to sleep on such a night. it was light enough to see a long way in the deserted street and it seemed more like morning or evening than night. on the way pierre remembered that anatole kuragin was expecting the usual set for cards that evening after which there was generally a drinking bout finishing with visits of a kind pierre was very fond of. i should like to go to kuragins thought he. but he immediately recalled his promise to prince andrew not to go there. then as happens to people of weak character he desired so passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed to that he decided to go. the thought immediately occurred to him that his promise to prince andrew was of no account because before he gave it he had already promised prince anatole to come to his gathering besides thought he all such words of honor are conventional things with no definite meaning especially if one considers that by tomorrow one may be dead or something so extraordinary may happen to one that honor and dishonor will be all the same pierre often indulged in reflections of this sort nullifying all his decisions and intentions. he went to kuragins. reaching the large house near the horse guards barracks in which anatole lived pierre entered the lighted porch ascended the stairs and went in at the open door. there was no one in the anteroom empty bottles cloaks and overshoes were lying about there was a smell of alcohol and sounds of voices and shouting in the distance. cards and supper were over but the visitors had not yet dispersed. pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room in which were the remains of supper. a footman thinking no one saw him was drinking on the sly what was left in the glasses. from the third room came sounds of laughter the shouting of familiar voices the growling of a bear and general commotion. some eight or nine young men were crowding anxiously round an open window. three others were romping with a young bear one pulling him by the chain and trying to set him at the others. i bet a hundred on stevens shouted one. mind no holding on cried another. i bet on dolokhov cried a third. kuragin you part our hands. there leave bruin alone heres a bet on. at one draught or he loses shouted a fourth. jacob bring a bottle shouted the host a tall handsome fellow who stood in the midst of the group without a coat and with his fine linen shirt unfastened in front. wait a bit you fellows. here is petya good man cried he addressing pierre. another voice from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober ring cried from the window come here part the bets this was dolokhov an officer of the semenov regiment a notorious gambler and duelist who was living with anatole. pierre smiled looking about him merrily. i dont understand. whats it all about wait a bit he is not drunk yet a bottle here said anatole taking a glass from the table he went up to pierre. first of all you must drink pierre drank one glass after another looking from under his brows at the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window and listening to their chatter. anatole kept on refilling pierres glass while explaining that dolokhov was betting with stevens an english naval officer that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the outer ledge of the third floor window with his legs hanging out. go on you must drink it all said anatole giving pierre the last glass or i wont let you go no i wont said pierre pushing anatole aside and he went up to the window. dolokhov was holding the englishmans hand and clearly and distinctly repeating the terms of the bet addressing himself particularly to anatole and pierre. dolokhov was of medium height with curly hair and lightblue eyes. he was about twentyfive. like all infantry officers he wore no mustache so that his mouth the most striking feature of his face was clearly seen. the lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved. the middle of the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closed firmly on the firm lower one and something like two distinct smiles played continually round the two corners of the mouth this together with the resolute insolent intelligence of his eyes produced an effect which made it impossible not to notice his face. dolokhov was a man of small means and no connections. yet though anatole spent tens of thousands of rubles dolokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a footing that all who knew them including anatole himself respected him more than they did anatole. dolokhov could play all games and nearly always won. however much he drank he never lost his clearheadedness. both kuragin and dolokhov were at that time notorious among the rakes and scapegraces of petersburg. the bottle of rum was brought. the window frame which prevented anyone from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen who were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of the gentlemen around. anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window. he wanted to smash something. pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame but could not move it. he smashed a pane. you have a try hercules said he turning to pierre. pierre seized the crossbeam tugged and wrenched the oak frame out with a crash. take it right out or theyll think im holding on said dolokhov. is the englishman bragging. eh is it all right said anatole. firstrate said pierre looking at dolokhov who with a bottle of rum in his hand was approaching the window from which the light of the sky the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset was visible. dolokhov the bottle of rum still in his hand jumped onto the window sill. listen cried he standing there and addressing those in the room. all were silent. i bet fifty imperialshe spoke french that the englishman might understand him but he did not speak it very welli bet fifty imperials. or do you wish to make it a hundred added he addressing the englishman. no fifty replied the latter. all right. fifty imperials. that i will drink a whole bottle of rum without taking it from my mouth sitting outside the window on this spot he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window and without holding on to anything. is that right quite right said the englishman. anatole turned to the englishman and taking him by one of the buttons of his coat and looking down at himthe englishman was shortbegan repeating the terms of the wager to him in english. wait cried dolokhov hammering with the bottle on the window sill to attract attention. wait a bit kuragin. listen if anyone else does the same i will pay him a hundred imperials. do you understand the englishman nodded but gave no indication whether he intended to accept this challenge or not. anatole did not release him and though he kept nodding to show that he understood anatole went on translating dolokhovs words into english. a thin young lad an hussar of the life guards who had been losing that evening climbed on the window sill leaned over and looked down. oh oh oh he muttered looking down from the window at the stones of the pavement. shut up cried dolokhov pushing him away from the window. the lad jumped awkwardly back into the room tripping over his spurs. placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily dolokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered his legs. pressing against both sides of the window he adjusted himself on his seat lowered his hands moved a little to the right and then to the left and took up the bottle. anatole brought two candles and placed them on the window sill though it was already quite light. dolokhovs back in his white shirt and his curly head were lit up from both sides. everyone crowded to the window the englishman in front. pierre stood smiling but silent. one man older than the others present suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted to seize hold of dolokhovs shirt. i say this is folly hell be killed said this more sensible man. anatole stopped him. dont touch him youll startle him and then hell be killed. eh. what then. eh dolokhov turned round and again holding on with both hands arranged himself on his seat. if anyone comes meddling again said he emitting the words separately through his thin compressed lips i will throw him down there. now then saying this he again turned round dropped his hands took the bottle and lifted it to his lips threw back his head and raised his free hand to balance himself. one of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some broken glass remained in that position without taking his eyes from the window and from dolokhovs back. anatole stood erect with staring eyes. the englishman looked on sideways pursing up his lips. the man who had wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw himself on a sofa with his face to the wall. pierre hid his face from which a faint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed horror and fear. all were still. pierre took his hands from his eyes. dolokhov still sat in the same position only his head was thrown further back till his curly hair touched his shirt collar and the hand holding the bottle was lifted higher and higher and trembled with the effort. the bottle was emptying perceptibly and rising still higher and his head tilting yet further back. why is it so long thought pierre. it seemed to him that more than half an hour had elapsed. suddenly dolokhov made a backward movement with his spine and his arm trembled nervously this was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on the sloping ledge. as he began slipping down his head and arm wavered still more with the strain. one hand moved as if to clutch the window sill but refrained from touching it. pierre again covered his eyes and thought he would never open them again. suddenly he was aware of a stir all around. he looked up dolokhov was standing on the window sill with a pale but radiant face. its empty. he threw the bottle to the englishman who caught it neatly. dolokhov jumped down. he smelt strongly of rum. well done. fine fellow. theres a bet for you. devil take you came from different sides. the englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money. dolokhov stood frowning and did not speak. pierre jumped upon the window sill. gentlemen who wishes to bet with me ill do the same thing he suddenly cried. even without a bet there tell them to bring me a bottle. ill do it. bring a bottle let him do it let him do it said dolokhov smiling. what next have you gone mad. no one would let you. why you go giddy even on a staircase exclaimed several voices. ill drink it lets have a bottle of rum shouted pierre banging the table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to climb out of the window. they seized him by his arms but he was so strong that everyone who touched him was sent flying. no youll never manage him that way said anatole. wait a bit and ill get round him. listen ill take your bet tomorrow but now we are all going to s. come on then cried pierre. come on. and well take bruin with us. and he caught the bear took it in his arms lifted it from the ground and began dancing round the room with it. chapter x prince vasili kept the promise he had given to princess drubetskaya who had spoken to him on behalf of her only son boris on the evening of anna pavlovnas soiree. the matter was mentioned to the emperor an exception made and boris transferred into the regiment of semenov guards with the rank of cornet. he received however no appointment to kutuzovs staff despite all anna mikhaylovnas endeavors and entreaties. soon after anna pavlovnas reception anna mikhaylovna returned to moscow and went straight to her rich relations the rostovs with whom she stayed when in the town and where her darling bory who had only just entered a regiment of the line and was being at once transferred to the guards as a cornet had been educated from childhood and lived for years at a time. the guards had already left petersburg on the tenth of august and her son who had remained in moscow for his equipment was to join them on the march to radzivilov. it was st. natalias day and the name day of two of the rostovsthe mother and the youngest daughterboth named nataly. ever since the morning carriages with six horses had been coming and going continually bringing visitors to the countess rostovas big house on the povarskaya so well known to all moscow. the countess herself and her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawingroom with the visitors who came to congratulate and who constantly succeeded one another in relays. the countess was a woman of about fortyfive with a thin oriental type of face evidently worn out with childbearingshe had had twelve. a languor of motion and speech resulting from weakness gave her a distinguished air which inspired respect. princess anna mikhaylovna drubetskaya who as a member of the household was also seated in the drawing room helped to receive and entertain the visitors. the young people were in one of the inner rooms not considering it necessary to take part in receiving the visitors. the count met the guests and saw them off inviting them all to dinner. i am very very grateful to you mon cher or ma cherehe called everyone without exception and without the slightest variation in his tone my dear whether they were above or below him in ranki thank you for myself and for our two dear ones whose name day we are keeping. but mind you come to dinner or i shall be offended ma chere on behalf of the whole family i beg you to come mon cher these words he repeated to everyone without exception or variation and with the same expression on his full cheerful cleanshaven face the same firm pressure of the hand and the same quick repeated bows. as soon as he had seen a visitor off he returned to one of those who were still in the drawing room drew a chair toward him or her and jauntily spreading out his legs and putting his hands on his knees with the air of a man who enjoys life and knows how to live he swayed to and fro with dignity offered surmises about the weather or touched on questions of health sometimes in russian and sometimes in very bad but selfconfident french then again like a man weary but unflinching in the fulfillment of duty he rose to see some visitors off and stroking his scanty gray hairs over his bald patch also asked them to dinner. sometimes on his way back from the anteroom he would pass through the conservatory and pantry into the large marble dining hall where tables were being set out for eighty people and looking at the footmen who were bringing in silver and china moving tables and unfolding damask table linen he would call dmitri vasilevich a man of good family and the manager of all his affairs and while looking with pleasure at the enormous table would say well dmitri youll see that things are all as they should be thats right the great thing is the serving thats it. and with a complacent sigh he would return to the drawing room. marya lvovna karagina and her daughter announced the countess gigantic footman in his bass voice entering the drawing room. the countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold snuffbox with her husbands portrait on it. im quite worn out by these callers. however ill see her and no more. she is so affected. ask her in she said to the footman in a sad voice as if saying very well finish me off. a tall stout and proudlooking woman with a roundfaced smiling daughter entered the drawing room their dresses rustling. dear countess what an age. she has been laid up poor child. at the razumovskis ball. and countess apraksina. i was so delighted. came the sounds of animated feminine voices interrupting one another and mingling with the rustling of dresses and the scraping of chairs. then one of those conversations began which last out until at the first pause the guests rise with a rustle of dresses and say i am so delighted. mammas health. and countess apraksina. and then again rustling pass into the anteroom put on cloaks or mantles and drive away. the conversation was on the chief topic of the day the illness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of catherines day count bezukhov and about his illegitimate son pierre the one who had behaved so improperly at anna pavlovnas reception. i am so sorry for the poor count said the visitor. he is in such bad health and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill him what is that asked the countess as if she did not know what the visitor alluded to though she had already heard about the cause of count bezukhovs distress some fifteen times. thats what comes of a modern education exclaimed the visitor. it seems that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do as he liked now in petersburg i hear he has been doing such terrible things that he has been expelled by the police. you dont say so replied the countess. he chose his friends badly interposed anna mikhaylovna. prince vasilis son he and a certain dolokhov have it is said been up to heaven only knows what and they have had to suffer for it. dolokhov has been degraded to the ranks and bezukhovs son sent back to moscow. anatole kuragins father managed somehow to get his sons affair hushed up but even he was ordered out of petersburg. but what have they been up to asked the countess. they are regular brigands especially dolokhov replied the visitor. he is a son of marya ivanovna dolokhova such a worthy woman but there just fancy those three got hold of a bear somewhere put it in a carriage and set off with it to visit some actresses the police tried to interfere and what did the young men do they tied a policeman and the bear back to back and put the bear into the moyka canal. and there was the bear swimming about with the policeman on his back what a nice figure the policeman must have cut my dear shouted the count dying with laughter. oh how dreadful how can you laugh at it count yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing. it was all they could do to rescue the poor man continued the visitor. and to think it is cyril vladimirovich bezukhovs son who amuses himself in this sensible manner and he was said to be so well educated and clever. this is all that his foreign education has done for him i hope that here in moscow no one will receive him in spite of his money. they wanted to introduce him to me but i quite declined i have my daughters to consider. why do you say this young man is so rich asked the countess turning away from the girls who at once assumed an air of inattention. his children are all illegitimate. i think pierre also is illegitimate. the visitor made a gesture with her hand. i should think he has a score of them. princess anna mikhaylovna intervened in the conversation evidently wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in society. the fact of the matter is said she significantly and also in a half whisper everyone knows count cyrils reputation. he has lost count of his children but this pierre was his favorite. how handsome the old man still was only a year ago remarked the countess. i have never seen a handsomer man. he is very much altered now said anna mikhaylovna. well as i was saying prince vasili is the next heir through his wife but the count is very fond of pierre looked after his education and wrote to the emperor about him so that in the case of his deathand he is so ill that he may die at any moment and dr. lorrain has come from petersburg no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune pierre or prince vasili. forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles i know it all very well for prince vasili told me himself. besides cyril vladimirovich is my mothers second cousin. hes also my borys godfather she added as if she attached no importance at all to the fact. prince vasili arrived in moscow yesterday. i hear he has come on some inspection business remarked the visitor. yes but between ourselves said the princess that is a pretext. the fact is he has come to see count cyril vladimirovich hearing how ill he is. but do you know my dear that was a capital joke said the count and seeing that the elder visitor was not listening he turned to the young ladies. i can just imagine what a funny figure that policeman cut and as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman his portly form again shook with a deep ringing laugh the laugh of one who always eats well and in particular drinks well. so do come and dine with us he said.
