what is science richard p. feynman i thank mr. derose for the opportunity to join you science teachers. i also am a science teacher. i have much experience only in teaching graduate students in physics and as a result of the experience i know that i dont know how to teach. i am sure that you who are real teachers working at the bottom level of this hierarchy of teachers instructors of teachers experts on curricula also are sure that you too dont know how to do it otherwise you wouldnt bother to come to the convention. the subject what is science is not my choice. it was mr. deroses subject. but i would like to say that i think that what is science is not at all equivalent to how to teach science and i must call that to your attention for two reasons. in the first place from the way that i am preparing to give this lecture it may seem that i am trying to tell you how to teach science i am not at all in any way because i dont know anything about small children. i have one so i know that i don t know. the other is i think that most of us because there is so much talk and so many papers and so many experts in the field have some kind of a feeling of lack of selfconfidence. in some way you are always being lectured on how things are not going too well and how you should learn to teach better. i am not going to berate you for the bad work you are doing and indicate how it can definitely be improved that is not my intention. as a matter of fact we have very good students coming into cal tech and during the years we found them getting better and better. now how it is done i dont know. i wonder if you know. i dont want to interfere with the system it is very good. only two days ago we had a conference in which we decided that we dont have to teach a course in elementary quantum mechanics in the graduate school any more. when i was a student they didnt even have a course in quantum mechanics in the graduate school it was considered too difficult a subject. when i first started to teach we had one. now we teach it to undergraduates. we discover now that we dont have to have elementary quantum mechanics for graduates from other schools. why is it getting pushed down because we are able to teach better in the university and that is because the students coming up are better trained. what is science of course you all must know if you teach it. thats common sense. what can i say if you dont know every teachers edition of every textbook gives a complete discussion of the subject. there is some kind of distorted distillation and watereddown and mixedup words of francis bacon from some centuries ago words which then were supposed to be the deep philosophy of science. but one of the greatest experimental scientists of the time who was really doing something william harvey said that what bacon said science was was the science that a lord chancellor would do. he spoke of making observations but omitted the vital factor of judgment about what to observe and what to pay attention to. and so what science is is not what the philosophers have said it is and certainly not what the teacher editions say it is. what it is is a problem which i set for myself after i said i would give this talk. after some time i was reminded of a little poem a centipede was happy quite until a toad in fun said pray which leg comes after which this raised his doubts to such a pitch he fell distracted in the ditch not knowing how to run. all my life i have been doing science and known what it was but what i have come to tell you which foot comes after which i am unable to do it and furthermore i am worried by the analogy with the poem that when i go home i will no longer be able to do any research. there have been a lot of attempts by the various press reporters to get some kind of a capsule of this talk i prepared it only a little time ago so it was impossible but i can see them all rushing out now to write some sort of headline which says the professor called the president of nsta a toad. under these circumstances of the difficulty of the subject and my dislike of philosophical exposition i will present it in a very unusual way. i am just going to tell you how i learned what science is. thats a little bit childish. i learned it as a child. i have had it in my blood from the beginning. and i would like to tell you how it got in. this sounds as though i am trying to tell you how to teach but that is not my intention. im going to tell you what science is like by how i learned what science is like. my father did it to me. when my mother was carrying me it is reported i am not directly aware of the conversation my father said that if its a boy hell be a scientist. how did he do it he never told me i should be a scientist. he was not a scientist he was a businessman a sales manager of a uniform company but he read about science and loved it. when i was very youngthe earliest story i knowwhen i still ate in a high chair my father would play a game with me after dinner. he had bought a whole lot of old rectangular bathroom floor tiles from some place in long island city. we sat them up on end one next to the other and i was allowed to push the end one and watch the whole thing go down. so far so good. next the game improved. the tiles were different colors. i must put one white two blues one white two blues and another white and then two bluesi may want to put another blue butit must be a white. you recognize already the usual insidious cleverness first delight him in play and then slowly inject material of educational value. well my mother who is a much more feeling woman began to realize the insidiousness of his efforts and said mel please let the poor child put a blue tile if he wants to. my father said no i want him to pay attention to patterns. it is the only thing i can do that is mathematics at this earliest level. if i were giving a talk on what is mathematics i would already have answered you. mathematics is looking for patterns. the fact is that this kindergarten had some effect. we had a direct experimental test at the time i got to kindergarten. we had weaving in those days. theyve taken it out its too difficult for children. we used to weave colored paper through vertical strips and make patterns. the kindergarten teacher was so amazed that she sent a special letter home to report that this child was very unusual because he seemed to be able to figure out ahead of time what pattern he was going to get and made amazingly intricate patterns. so the tile game did do something to me. mathematics is looking for patterns. i would like to report other evidence that mathematics is only patterns. when i was at cornell i was rather fascinated by the student body which seems to me was a dilute mixture of some sensible people in a big mass of dumb people studying home economics etc. including lots of girls. i used to sit in the cafeteria with the students and eat and try to overhear their conversations and see if there was one intelligent word coming out. you can imagine my surprise when i discovered a tremendous thing it seemed to me. i listened to a conversation between two girls and one was explaining that if you want to make a straight line you see you go over a certain number to the right for each row you go up that is if you go over each time the same amount when you go up a row you make a straight line. a deep principle of analytic geometry it went on. i was rather amazed. i didnt realize the female mind was capable of understanding analytic geometry. she went on and said suppose you have another line coming in from the other side and you want to figure out where they are going to intersect. suppose on one line you go over two to the right for every one you go up and the other lines go over three to the right for every one that goes up and they start twenty steps apart etc. i was flabbergasted. she figured out where the intersection was. it turned out that one girl was explaining to the other how to knit argyle socks. therefore i did learn a lesson the female mind is capable of understanding analytic geometry. those people who have for years been insisting in the face of all obvious evidence to the contrary that the male and female are equally capable of rational thought may have something. the difficulty may just be that we have never yet discovered a way to communicate with the female mind. if it is done in the right way you may be able to get something out of it. now i will go on with my own experience as a youngster in mathematics. another thing that my father told meand i cant quite explain it because it was more an emotion than a tellingwas that the ratio of the circumference to the diameter of all circles was always the same no matter what the size. that didnt seem to me too unobvious but the ratio had some marvelous property. that was a wonderful number a deep number pi. there was a mystery about this number that i didnt quite understand as a youth but this was a great thing and the result was that i looked for pi everywhere. when i was learning later in school how to make the decimals for fractions and how to make i wrote and thinking i recognized a friend wrote that it equals pi the ratio of circumference to diameter of a circle. the teacher corrected it to i illustrate these things to show an influence. the idea that there is a mystery that there is a wonder about the number was important to me not what the number was. very much later when i was doing experiments in the laboratory i mean my own home laboratoryfiddling aroundno excuse me i didnt do experiments i never did i just fiddled around. gradually through books and manuals i began to discover there were formulas applicable to electricity in relating the current and resistance and so on. one day looking at the formulas in some book or other i discovered a formula for the frequency of a resonant circuit which was f pi sqrtlc where l is the inductance and c the capacitance of the circle you laugh but i was very serious then. pi was a thing with circles and here is pi coming out of an electric circuit. where was the circle do those of you who laughed know how that comes about i have to love the thing. i have to look for it. i have to think about it. and then i realized of course that the coils are made in circles. about half a year later i found another book which gave the inductance of round coils and square coils and there were other pis in those formulas. i began to think about it again and i realized that the pi did not come from the circular coils. i understand it better now but in my heart i still dont quite know where that circle is where that pi comes from. when i was still pretty young i dont know how old exactly i had a ball in a wagon i was pulling and i noticed something so i ran up to my father to say that when i pull the wagon the ball runs to the back and when i am running with the wagon and stop the ball runs to the front. why how would you answer he said that nobody knows he said its very general though it happens all the time to anything anything that is moving tends to keep moving anything standing still tries to maintain that condition. if you look close you will see the ball does not run to the back of the wagon where you start from standing still. it moves forward a bit too but not as fast as the wagon. the back of the wagon catches up with the ball which has trouble getting started moving. its called inertia that principle. i did run back to check and sure enough the ball didnt go backwards. he put the difference between what we call it very distinctly. regarding this business about names and words i would tell you another story. we used to go up to the catskill mountains for vacations. in new york you go to the catskill mountains for vacations. the poor husbands had to go to work during the week but they would come rushing out for weekends and stay with the families. on the weekends my father would take me for walks in the woods. he often took me for walks and we learned all about nature and so on in the process. but the other children friends of mine also wanted to go and tried to get my father to take them. he didnt want to because he said i was more advanced. im not trying to tell you how to teach because what my father was doing was with a class of just one student if he had a class of more than one he was incapable of doing it. so we went alone for our walk in the woods. but mothers were very powerful in those days as they are now and they convinced the other fathers that they had to take their own sons out for walks in the woods. so all fathers took all sons out for walks in the woods on sunday afternoon. the next day monday we were playing in the fields and this boy said to me see that bird standing on the wheat there whats the name of it i said i havent got the slightest idea. he said its a brownthroated thrush. your father doesnt teach you much about science. i smiled to myself because my father had already taught me that that doesnt tell me anything about the bird. he taught me see that bird. its a brownthroated thrush but in germany its called a halzenflugel and in chinese they call it a chung ling and even if you know all those names for it you still know nothing about the bird. you only know something about people what they call the bird. now that thrush sings and teaches its young to fly and flies so many miles away during the summer across the country and nobody knows how it finds its way and so forth. there is a difference between the name of the thing and what goes on. the result of this is that i cannot remember any bodys name and when people discuss physics with me they often are exasperated when they say the fitzceonin effect and i ask what is the effect and i cant remember the half of it. i would like to say a word or two may i interrupt my little words and definitions because it is necessary to learn the words. that doesnt mean just because it is not science that we dont have the words. we are not talking about what to teach we are talking about what science is. it is not science to know how to change centigrade to fahrenheit. its necessary but it is not exactly science. in the same sense if you were discussing what art is you wouldnt say art is the knowledge of the fact that a b pencil is softer than a h pencil. its a district difference. that doesnt mean an art teacher shouldnt teach that or that an artist gets along very well if he doesnt know that. actually you can find out in a minute by trying it but thats a scientific way that art teachers may not think of explaining. in order to talk to each other we have to have words and thats all right. its a good idea to try to see the difference and its a good idea to know when we are teaching the tools of science such as words and when we are teaching science itself.
